---
title: "limit cia role to intelligence."
layout: post
category: media
author: harry truman
format: text
type: transcript
tags: 
 - cia

published_date: "1963-12-22"
publisher: washington post
---

I think it has become necessary to take another look at the purpose and
operations of our Central Intelligence Agency — CIA. At least, I would like to
submit here the original reason why I thought it necessary to organize this
Agency during my Administration, what I expected it to do and how it was to
operate as an arm of the President. 

I think it is fairly obvious that by and large a President's performance in
office is as effective as the information he has and the information he gets.
That is to say, that assuming the President himself possesses a knowledge of
our history, a sensitive understanding of our institutions, and an insight into
the needs and aspirations of the people, he needs to have available to him the
most accurate and up-to-the-minute information on what is going on everywhere
in the world, and particularly of the trends and developments in all the danger
spots in the contest between East and West. This is an immense task and
requires a special kind of an intelligence facility. 

Of course, every President has available to him all the information gathered by
the many intelligence agencies already in existence. The Departments of State,
Defense, Commerce, Interior and others are constantly engaged in extensive
information gathering and have done excellent work. 

But their collective information reached the President all too frequently in
conflicting conclusions. At times, the intelligence reports tended to be
slanted to conform to established positions of a given department. This becomes
confusing and what's worse, such intelligence is of little use to a President
in reaching the right decisions. 

Therefore, I decided to set up a special organization charged with the
collection of all intelligence reports from every available source, and to have
those reports reach me as President without department "treatment" or
interpretations. 

I wanted and needed the information in its "natural raw" state and in as
comprehensive a volume as it was practical for me to make full use of it. But
the most important thing about this move was to guard against the chance of
intelligence being used to influence or to lead the President into unwise
decisions— and I thought it was necessary that the President do his own
thinking and evaluating. 

Since the responsibility for decision making was his— then he had to be sure
that no information is kept from him for whatever reason at the discretion of
any one department or agency, or that unpleasant facts be kept from him. There
are always those who would want to shield a President from bad news or
misjudgments to spare him from being "upset." 

For some time I have been disturbed by the way CIA has been diverted from its
original assignment. It has become an operational and at times a policy-making
arm of the Government. This has led to trouble and may have compounded our
difficulties in several explosive areas. 

I never had any thought that when I set up the CIA that it would be injected
into peacetime cloak and dagger operations. Some of the complications and
embarrassment I think we have experienced are in part attributable to the fact
that this quiet intelligence arm of the President has been so removed from its
intended role that it is being interpreted as a symbol of sinister and
mysterious foreign intrigue— and a subject for cold war enemy propaganda. 

With all the nonsense put out by Communist propaganda about "Yankee
imperialism," "exploitive capitalism," "war-mongering," "monopolists," in their
name-calling assault on the West, the last thing we needed was for the CIA to
be seized upon as something akin to a subverting influence in the affairs of
other people. 

I well knew the first temporary director of the CIA, Adm. Souers, and the later
permanent directors of the CIA, Gen. Hoyt Vandenberg and Allen Dulles. These
were men of the highest character, patriotism and integrity— and I assume this
is true of all those who continue in charge. 

But there are now some searching questions that need to be answered. I,
therefore, would like to see the CIA be restored to its original assignment as
the intelligence arm of the President, and that whatever else it can properly
perform in that special field— and that its operational duties be terminated or
properly used elsewhere. 

We have grown up as a nation, respected for our free institutions and for our
ability to maintain a free and open society. There is something about the way
the CIA has been functioning that is casting a shadow over our historic
position and I feel that we need to correct it. 
