---
title: atlanta compromise speech 
layout: post
type: transcript
format: text
category: media
tags:
 - reconstruction

author: Booker T. Washington
published_date: "1895-09-18"
icon: booker-t-washington.jpg
---

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Board of Directors and Citizens:

One-third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No enterprise
seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section can disregard
this element of our population and reach the highest success. I but convey to
you, Mr. President and Directors, the sentiment of the masses of my race when I
say that in no way have the value and manhood of the American Negro been more
fittingly and generously recognized than by the managers of this magnificent
Exposition at every stage of its progress. It is a recognition that will do
more to cement the friendship of the two races than any occurrence since the
dawn of our freedom.

Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a new era
of industrial progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange that in
the first years of our new life we began at the top instead of at the bottom;
that a seat in Congress or the state legislature was more sought than real
estate or industrial skill; that the political convention or stump speaking had
more attractions than starting a dairy farm or truck garden.

A ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. From the
mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal,“Water, water; we die of
thirst!” The answer from the friendly vessel at once came back, “Cast down your
bucket where you are.” A second time the signal, “Water, water; send us water!”
ran up from the distressed vessel, and was answered, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” And a third and fourth signal for water was answered, “Cast
down your bucket where you are.” The captain of the distressed vessel, at last
heeding the injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full of fresh,
sparkling water from the mouth of the Amazon River. To those of my race who
depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land or who underestimate the
importance of cultivating friendly relations with the Southern white man, who
is their next-door neighbor, I would say: “Cast down your bucket where you
are”— cast it down in making friends in every manly way of the people of all
races by whom we are surrounded.

Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service, and
in the professions. And in this connection it is well to bear in mind that
whatever other sins the South may be called to bear, when it comes to business,
pure and simple, it is in the South that the Negro is given a man’s chance in
the commercial world, and in nothing is this Exposition more eloquent than in
emphasizing this chance. Our greatest danger is that in the great leap from
slavery to freedom we may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live
by the productions of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper
in proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labour, and put brains
and skill into the common occupations of life; shall prosper in proportion as
we learn to draw the line between the superficial and the substantial, the
ornamental gewgaws of life and the useful. No race can prosper till it learns
that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at
the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top. Nor should we permit our
grievances to overshadow our opportunities.

To those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign birth
and strange tongue and habits for the prosperity of the South, were I permitted
I would repeat what I say to my own race,“Cast down your bucket where you are.”
Cast it down among the eight millions of Negroes whose habits you know, whose
fidelity and love you have tested in days when to have proved treacherous meant
the ruin of your firesides. Cast down your bucket among these people who have,
without strikes and labour wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests,
builded your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels
of the earth, and helped make possible this magnificent representation of the
progress of the South. Casting down your bucket among my people, helping and
encouraging them as you are doing on these grounds, and to education of head,
hand, and heart, you will find that they will buy your surplus land, make
blossom the waste places in your fields, and run your factories. While doing
this, you can be sure in the future, as in the past, that you and your families
will be surrounded by the most patient, faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful
people that the world has seen. As we have proved our loyalty to you in the
past, in nursing your children, watching by the sick-bed of your mothers and
fathers, and often following them with tear-dimmed eyes to their graves, so in
the future, in our humble way, we shall stand by you with a devotion that no
foreigner can approach, ready to lay down our lives, if need be, in defense of
yours, interlacing our industrial, commercial, civil, and religious life with
yours in a way that shall make the interests of both races one. In all things
that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress.

There is no defense or security for any of us except in the highest
intelligence and development of all. If anywhere there are efforts tending to
curtail the fullest growth of the Negro, let these efforts be turned into
stimulating, encouraging, and making him the most useful and intelligent
citizen. Effort or means so invested will pay a thousand per cent interest.
These efforts will be twice blessed—blessing him that gives and him that takes.
There is no escape through law of man or God from the inevitable:

The laws of changeless justice bind Oppressor with oppressed;

And close as sin and suffering joined We march to fate abreast...

Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward, or
they will pull against you the load downward. We shall constitute one-third and
more of the ignorance and crime of the South, or one-third [of] its
intelligence and progress; we shall contribute one-third to the business and
industrial prosperity of the South, or we shall prove a veritable body of
death, stagnating, depressing, retarding every effort to advance the body
politic.

Gentlemen of the Exposition, as we present to you our humble effort at an
exhibition of our progress, you must not expect overmuch. Starting thirty years
ago with ownership here and there in a few quilts and pumpkins and chickens
(gathered from miscellaneous sources), remember the path that has led from
these to the inventions and production of agricultural implements, buggies,
steam-engines, newspapers, books, statuary, carving, paintings, the management
of drug stores and banks, has not been trodden without contact with thorns and
thistles. While we take pride in what we exhibit as a result of our independent
efforts, we do not for a moment forget that our part in this exhibition would
fall far short of your expectations but for the constant help that has come to
our educational life, not only from the Southern states, but especially from
Northern philanthropists, who have made their gifts a constant stream of
blessing and encouragement.

The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social
equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the
privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant
struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to
contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized. It is
important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly
more important that we be prepared for the exercise of these privileges. The
opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more
than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house.

In conclusion, may I repeat that nothing in thirty years has given us more hope
and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white race, as this
opportunity offered by the Exposition; and here bending, as it were, over the
altar that represents the results of the struggles of your race and mine, both
starting practically empty-handed three decades ago, I pledge that in your
effort to work out the great and intricate problem which God has laid at the
doors of the South, you shall have at all times the patient, sympathetic help
of my race; only let this be constantly in mind, that, while from
representations in these buildings of the product of field, of forest, of mine,
of factory, letters, and art, much good will come, yet far above and beyond
material benefits will be that higher good, that, let us pray God, will come,
in a blotting out of sectional differences and racial animosities and
suspicions, in a determination to administer absolute justice, in a willing
obedience among all classes to the mandates of law. This, coupled with our
material prosperity, will bring into our beloved South a new heaven and a new
earth.
