---
title: "evaluation of email records management and cybersecurity requirements."
layout: post
category: media
author: State Department Office of the Inspector General
format: text
type: article
tags: 
 - clinton
 - email

published_date: "2016-05-26"
icon: oig-sd.svg
link: "https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/2842429/ESP-16-03-Final.pdf"
---

The Federal Records Act requires appropriate management and preservation of
Federal Government records, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
that document the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and
essential transactions of an agency. For the last two decades, both Department
of State (Department) policy and Federal regulations have explicitly stated
that emails may qualify as Federal records. 

As is the case throughout the Federal Government, management weaknesses at the
Department have contributed to the loss or removal of email records,
particularly records created by the Office of the Secretary. These weaknesses
include a limited ability to retrieve email records, inaccessibility of
electronic files, failure to comply with requirements for departing employees,
and a general lack of oversight.  

OIG’s ability to evaluate the Office of the Secretary’s compliance with
policies regarding records preservation and use of non-Departmental
communications systems was, at times, hampered by these weaknesses. However,
based on its review of records, questionnaires, and interviews, OIG determined
that email usage and preservation practices varied across the tenures of the
five most recent Secretaries and that, accordingly, compliance with statutory,
regulatory, and internal requirements varied as well.  
