---
title: "...to the legislatures of the southern states."
category: media
layout: post
type: transcript
format: text
tags: 
 - civil war
 - history
 - suffrage
published_date: "1867-01-15"
author: "Henry Blackwell"
icon: henry-blackwell.jpg
---

WHAT THE SOUTH CAN DO.

How the Southern States can make themselves Masters of the Situation.

TO THE LEGISLATURES OF THE SOUTHERN STATES.

I WRITE to you as the intellectual leaders of the Southern people--men who
should be able and willing to transcend the prejudices of section--to suggest
the only ground of settlement between North and South which, in my judgment,
can be successfully adopted.

Let me state the political situation. The radical principles of the North are
immovably fixed upon negro suffrage as a condition of Southern State
reconstruction. The proposed Constitutional Amendment is not regarded as a
finality. It satisfies nobody, not even its authors. In the minds of the
Northern people the negroes are now associated with the idea of loyalty to the
Union. They are considered citizens. They are respected as "our allies." It is
believed in the North that a majority of the white people of the South are at
heart the enemies of the Union. The advocates of negro suffrage daily grow
stronger and more numerous.

On the other hand a majority of the Southern white population are inflexibly
opposed to negro suffrage in any form, universal or qualified, and are prepared
to resist its introduction by every means in their power. In alliance with the
President and the Northern Democracy, they protestagainst any and all terms of
reconstruction, demand unconditional readmission, and await in gloomy silence
the Republican initiative.

This absolute and growing antagonism can only end, if continued, in one of two
results: either in a renewal of civil war, or in a concession by the South of
political equality to the negro.

But in case of war, the South cannot possibly succeed. The North is to-day far
stronger in men and money, in farms and factories, than she was in 1860.

She is now trained to war, conscious of overwhelming strength, flushed with
victory, and respected, as never before, by the nations of Europe. Moreover,
she is much more united in political sentiment. Do not again deceive
yourselves. If you should resort to arms, the North would be practically
unanimous. The President would instantly be impeached and a radical successor
appointed.

The South has lost social unity with the loss of slavery. She cannot fight
better than before. And the braver her action, the more terrible would be her
fate.

Gentlemen, these are facts--not theories. Wise men try to see things as they
are, uncolored by opinion or preference.

The interest of both North and South, since they must live together, is peace,
harmony and real fraternity. No adjustment can fully succeed unless it is
acceptable to both sections. Therefore the statesman and patriot must find a
common ground as a basis of permanent reconciliation.

Now the radicalism of the North is actual, organic and progressive. Recognise
the fact!

But if "governments derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed"--if "taxation without representation is tyranny"--and "on these two
commandments hang all the (Republican) law and the prophets"--then these
propositions are as applicable to women as to negroes.

"Consistency is a jewel." The principle is so broad that, if you accept it in
its entirety, you can afford to lead--not follow.

The population of the late slave States is about twelve million; eight million
white, four million black. The radicals demand suffrage for the black men on
the ground named above. Very good. Say to them, as Mr. Cowan said to the
advocates of negro male suffrage in the District, "apply your principle! Give
suffrage to all men and women of mature age and sound mind, and we will accept
it as the basis of State and national reconstruction."

Consider the result from the Southern stand-point.

Your four millions of Southern white women will counterbalance your four
millions of negro men and women, and thus the political supremacy of your white
race will remain unchanged.

Think well of this. It is a calculation of the relative political influences of
white women and of negroes which perhaps your people have not yet considered.
Let us make the statement in figures. Estimating one male voter to every five
persons, your present vote is:

 * White males..........1,600,000
 * Add white females..........1,600,000
 * Total white voters..........3,200,000
 * Negro males..........800,000
 * Negro females..........800,000
 * Total negro voters..........1,600,000

Suppose all the negroes vote one way and all the whites the other, your white
majority would be 1,600,000--equal to your present total vote. Thus you would
control your own State legislation. Meanwhile, your influence in the councils
of the nation will be greater than ever before, because your emancipated slaves
will be counted in the basis of representation, instead of as formerly, in the
ratio of five for three.

In the light of the history of your Confederacy, can any Southerner fear to
trust the women of the South with the ballot?

But the propriety of your making the proposal lies deeper than any
consideration of sectional expediency. If you must try the Republican
experiment, try it fully and fairly. Since you are compelled to union with the
North, remove every seed of future controversy. If you are to share the future
government of your States with a race you deem naturally and hopelessly
inferior, avert the social chaos, which seems to you so imminent, by utilizing
the intelligence and patriotism of the wives and daughters of the South.

Plant yourselves upon the logical Northern principle. Then no new demands can
ever be made upon you. No future inroads of fanaticism can renew sectional
discord.

The effect upon the North would be to revolutionize political parties. "Justice
satisfies everybody." The negro, thus protected against oppression by
possessing the ballot, would cease to be the prominent object of philanthropic
interest. Northern distrust, disarmed by Southern magnanimity, would give place
to the liveliest sentiments of confidence and regard. The great political
desideratum would be attained. The negro question would be forever removed from
the political arena. National parties would again crystallize upon legitimate
questions of national interest--questions of tariff, finance and foreign
relations. The disastrous conflict between Federal and State jurisdiction would
cease. 

North and South, no longer hammer and anvil, would forget and forgive the past.
School-houses and churches would be our fortifications and intrenchments.
Capital and population would flow, like the Mississippi, towards the Gulf.

The black race would gravitate by the law of nature towards the tropics. The
memory and spirit of Washington would be cherished; and every deed of genuine
gallantry and humanity would be treasured as the common glory of the republic.

Do you say that Northern Republicans would not accept such a proposition? They
cannot avoid it.

The matter is in your own hands. In New Jersey (then a slave State) from 1776
to 1807, a period of thirty-one years, women and negroes voted on precisely the
same footing as white men. No catastrophe, social or political, ensued.

The following is an extract from the New Jersey election law of 1797:

"Sec. 9. Every voter shall openly and in full view deliver his or her ballot,
which shall be a single written ticket containing the names of the person, or
persons, for whom he or she votes," etc.

Your Southern Legislatures can extend suffrage on equal terms to "all
inhabitants," as the New Jersey State Convention did in 1776. Then let the
Republicans in Congress refuse to admit your Senators and Representatives, if
they dare. If so, they will go under. Upon that issue fairly made up, the men
of positive convictions would rally round the new and consistent Democratic
party. The very element which has destroyed slavery would side with the
victorious South, and "out of the nettle danger you would pluck the flower
safety."

Respectfully yours,  HENRY B. BLACKWELL.
