---
title: "secret files reveal structure of the islamic state."
layout: post
category: media
author: Christoph Reuter
format: text
type: article
tags: 
 - isis
 - war on terror

added_date: "2015-11-25"
published_date: "2015-04-18"
icon: der-spiegel.svg
link: "https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/islamic-state-files-show-structure-of-islamist-terror-group-a-1029274-druck.html"
---

An Iraqi officer planned Islamic State's takeover in Syria and SPIEGEL has been
given exclusive access to his papers. They portray an organization that, while
seemingly driven by religious fanaticism, is actually coldly calculating.  

Aloof. Polite. Cajoling. Extremely attentive. Restrained. Dishonest.
Inscrutable. Malicious. The rebels from northern Syria, remembering encounters
with him months later, recall completely different facets of the man. But they
agree on one thing: "We never knew exactly who we were sitting across from."  

In fact, not even those who shot and killed him after a brief firefight in the
town of Tal Rifaat on a January morning in 2014 knew the true identity of the
tall man in his late fifties. They were unaware that they had killed the
strategic head of the group calling itself "Islamic State" (IS). The fact that
this could have happened at all was the result of a rare but fatal
miscalculation by the brilliant planner. The local rebels placed the body into
a refrigerator, in which they intended to bury him. Only later, when they
realized how important the man was, did they lift his body out again.  

Samir Abd Muhammad al-Khlifawi was the real name of the Iraqi, whose bony
features were softened by a white beard. But no one knew him by that name. Even
his best-known pseudonym, Haji Bakr, wasn't widely known. But that was
precisely part of the plan. The former colonel in the intelligence service of
Saddam Hussein's air defense force had been secretly pulling the strings at IS
for years. Former members of the group had repeatedly mentioned him as one of
its leading figures. Still, it was never clear what exactly his role was.  

But when the architect of the Islamic State died, he left something behind that
he had intended to keep strictly confidential: the blueprint for this state. It
is a folder full of handwritten organizational charts, lists and schedules,
which describe how a country can be gradually subjugated. SPIEGEL has gained
exclusive access to the 31 pages, some consisting of several pages pasted
together. They reveal a multilayered composition and directives for action,
some already tested and others newly devised for the anarchical situation in
Syria's rebel-held territories. In a sense, the documents are the source code
of the most successful terrorist army in recent history.  

Until now, much of the information about IS has come from fighters who had
defected and data sets from the IS internal administration seized in Baghdad.
But none of this offered an explanation for the group's meteoric rise to
prominence, before air strikes in the late summer of 2014 put a stop to its
triumphal march.  

For the first time, the Haji Bakr documents now make it possible to reach
conclusions on how the IS leadership is organized and what role former
officials in the government of ex-dictator Saddam Hussein play in it. Above
all, however, they show how the takeover in northern Syria was planned, making
the group's later advances into Iraq possible in the first place. In addition,
months of research undertaken by SPIEGEL in Syria, as well as other newly
discovered records, exclusive to SPIEGEL, show that Haji Bakr's instructions
were carried out meticulously.  

Bakr's documents were long hidden in a tiny addition to a house in embattled
northern Syria. Reports of their existence were first made by an eyewitness who
had seen them in Haji Bakr's house shortly after his death. In April 2014, a
single page from the file was smuggled to Turkey, where SPIEGEL was able to
examine it for the first time. It only became possible to reach Tal Rifaat to
evaluate the entire set of handwritten papers in November 2014.  

"Our greatest concern was that these plans could fall into the wrong hands and
would never have become known," said the man who has been storing Haji Bakr's
notes after pulling them out from under a tall stack of boxes and blankets. The
man, fearing the IS death squads, wishes to remain anonymous.  
